Here are the two characters that mean, "butterfly".
Suppose I were to tell you that the second
character here is a symbol of an insect next
to a symbol of a leaf.
At first, that would seem easy to believe,
both in communicating the sense of "butterfly",
and in terms of the way other Chinese characters
are constructed.
However, the modern meanings and etymologies
ascribed to characters make simple explanations
difficult to believe.
I can almost guarantee that your teacher or
textbook told you that no, this was "just
phonetic", or said that it was a totally arbitrary
symbol, used to mean butterfly.
Here, on the left side of the screen, you
can see a character that means "flower", and
(if you recognize the tree radical) you can
see that it's a tree with an extra symbol
added at the top.
So, looking on the right-hand side of the
screen, it seems easy to believe that the
meaning "leaf" could be, similarly, a tree
with an extra symbol at the top, even if we
can't see the direct resemblance to a flower
in one case, nor a resemblance to a leaf in
the other.
Of course, it already takes a lot of imagination
to see a tree when you're looking at the tree
radical.
To digress on that point briefly, the first
thing you learn in studying the ancient characters
is to look for the resemblance of one character
to another, because the resemblance to the
actual things depicted has almost always disappeared.
In this example, we can see that one character
is a human arm, curving as it reaches downward,
and the other is the basically the same image
inverted, curving as it reaches upward.
There is barely any connection between the
pictograph and the modern meanings of these
two words, and there is definitely zero resemblance
between the ancient form and the modern writing-style.
However, the two characters are still linked:
they still have a close resemblance, reflecting
the original logic of the language (even if
that logic is now unknown to us).
You may be disappointed to learn that the
ancient image of an arm is never used to actually
mean "arm".
So, while the numeral nine is a cryptic drawing
of an arm, the word that actually means arm
is an unrelated puzzle involving the meat
radical.
Neither native speakers of the language nor
foreigners learn Chinese in this way: learning
the etymology and the relationship between
the components and their meanings.
The Kangxi system of radicals can be much
more misleading than helpful, in encouraging
us to think of components in terms of the
categories that organize the dictionary.
This is one of the first words you're likely
to learn in Chinese, partly because it so
often appears on street-signs, in the names
of businesses, and so on.
The modern meaning is similar to "an era (in
time)", sometimes suggesting a generation
of people, sometimes meaning the world as
a whole.
If your teachers or textbooks told you anything
about the symbol, they probably claimed that
it was an elaboration of an ancient symbol
for the numeral 30.
Here's what that ancient numeral looks like,
in both the modern standard script, and in
seal-script.
As Chinese characters go, it neither has any
resemblance to the modern character on the
left, nor does it resemble the seal-script.
Conversely, someone could easily say that
these two characters resemble each-other more
than either one resembles a picture of a leaf;
however, that's just as spurious as saying
that the symbol for a flower (shown before)
doesn't resemble a flower, or complaining
that the numeral 9 resembles an arm for no
good reason at all.
The theory that this character came from an
obsolete numeral created another problem in
compiling Chinese dictionaries: the numeral
30 isn't a radical, and is instead grouped
under the radical "ten", perhaps for lack
of a better alternative.
So we have this idea that the sense of "one
generation" could come from the numeral 30
(despite the lack of any graphical connection
between the characters) re-enforced by the
categories applied to the characters in the
dictionary.
Shì, the symbol on the left, has ended up
categorized under the numeral "one" --the
single brushstroke yī.
Just looking at the characters, it would be
impossible to guess the radical was the horizontal
line in the middle of it; and, of course,
all of the connections between the component
symbols and the character's meaning are difficult
to believe (whether we're talking about ten,
thirty or one).
The Kangxi system of radicals is not perfect,
and doesn't pretend to have a category that
makes sense for every character.
However, one idea, re-enforces the other:
people come to regard this symbol --in isolation--
as derived-from and linked to-numerals, and
then they read that meaning into the combined
characters.
Here you see the exact same symbol with the
addition of the grass radical at the top,
and the modern meaning is, simply, "leaf".
So we have the same graphic symbol preserved,
and the same meaning preserved.
This is the best and most obvious kind of
evidence you could hope for, and it isn't
hidden away in an obscure or obsolete character.
So, regarded in isolation, this just corroborates
the link between the meaning of "leaf" and
the image as a whole; but, in fact, it also
corroborates the link between leaves and the
further meaning of "an era", or a generation
in time.
Given that we've got a link that's both evident
in the ancient pictographs and corroborated
in the modern meaning of the words to some
extent, it should be easy for people to see
that shì here, really is a leaf, and that
the character for butterfly has a lot to do
with a leaf and an insect, and has nothing
to do with the numeral 30, and so on.
However, there are two problems: one is that
this symbol has disappeared in mainland China,
making it easy to forget, as modern simplification
assigned the sound and meaning to a totally
unrelated character.
So, the connection between the characters
has become invisible.
Secondly, people impose the meaning of the
component onto the character as a whole: even
the traditional character for "leaf" is now
explained as if it were an indirect inference
from the numeral 30.
The sense of "leaf" is supposedly inferred
from the numerical sense of many generations
of a tree, instead of reading the pictograph
of a leaf as a hint at the meaning of an-era-in-time.
So, as puzzles go, this one can be solved,
by looking at the characters (both ancient
and modern), but the connections between the
characters are obfuscated by modern dictionaries,
modern etymologies, and modern language-reforms.
It makes sense that the the butterfly is an
insect associated with the leaf, and it makes
more sense for the changing leaves to be associated
with changing generations than it does for
us to get the same meaning out of an obscure
numeral.
Now, admittedly, it is never enough with Chinese
to just say, "this makes sense", because all
kinds of things that are true don't make sense,
and things that makes sense aren't true.
The connections we're looking at here have
become invisible in modern, simplified Chinese:
the character for the leaf was reformed, but
the character for the butterfly was not.
In theory, simplified Chinese could have the
same arbitrary symbol for a leaf (replacing
the ancient symbol) in all characters, such
as this example meaning butterfly, but it
doesn't.
Ancient Chinese already has so many amazing
inconsistencies that this sort of modern addition
to the confusion is... uh... not appreciated.
Meanwhile, almost all of the explanations
you'll encounter have instead tried to argue
that the symbol is devolved from the numeral
thirty, along with the suggestion that thirty
years implied an era or a generation of mankind.
That idea is not supported by the seal-script,
it's not supported by oracle bones, nor any
other evidence, but it is reflected in the
way the dictionaries are organized, and it
has produced a lot of confusing explanations.
In general, those will be the explanations
you receive (if any) from teachers and textbooks
--partly because those teachers and textbooks
have to cope with the dictionaries.
While I don't think that shì has any link
to the numeral 30, I did present one contrasting
example in this video, showing that a modern
numeral can be derived from almost any symbol
imaginable: there is --currently-- no explanation
for why or how the image of an arm reaching
upward came to represent the numeral 9 in
the Chinese language.